I mentioned that Ionic caches pages, these stack of pages
and that explains why in the last module we had this back that when we deleted a recipe, it was still
there.
It's important to understand how the Angular lifecycle behaves and how it differs
when we're talking about a page that was loaded with the Angular router and that is therefore indirectly
also controlled by Ionic. In regular Angular components, no matter if we're using them by embedding their
selector into our templates or by loading them via routing, we have a certain lifecycle but we also
have a special lifecycle for the components
we did load via routing and I will call them Ionic pages here though these are regular Angular components,
just components
we loaded via the Angular router and which are therefore indirectly controlled by Ionic.
So for the regular Angular components, we have the ngOnInit,
then we also have other lifecycle hooks like ngOnChanges
but that's not so important here
and if we in a web for example go to a different page, we have ngOnDestroy. Now that will be called
when the component is basically removed and when it's really at this post.
Now for Ionic pages, because of that caching mechanism we got some new lifecycle methods. We got
ionViewWillEnter for example and that will run after ngOnInit,
we also got ionViewDidEnter which also runs after that and also after WillEnter.
Now the difference here is
ionViewWillEnter basically execute right before the content of the page has been loaded and is displayed
on the screen you could say and ionViewDidEnter will be called right after that.
Both are called whenever a page becomes visible and that is important because with caching, if a page
is still in cache and you are just not seeing it because another page is on top of it, on that stack
of pages, it will actually never be destroyed
so ngOnDestroy will never be called and ngOnInit will also never be called when you go back to
that page which is still on the stack of pages. ionViewWillEnter and DidEnter will be called because
these are called whenever the page becomes visible, when it becomes the top of that stack of pages
so to say. And since ngOnDestroy never gets called but you might still want to do some cleanup work,
you also get ionViewWillLeave and ionViewDidLeave
and these also are called whenever the page becomes invisible so to say, whenever a new page is on top
of it
but it will also be called in places where ngOnDestroy is not called, which is the case if it's
just not the topmost page of the stack anymore but still on the stack.
So let's have a look at this in practice. Here is the little recipes project we worked on and which
we debugged and so on
and here is our code for that.
Now I'm in the recipes.page.ts file, in our main starting page, this page here and there we have
ngOnInit.
Here we load the recipes and as we found out in the debugging module, our problem is that ngOnInit
is called initially,
so when I reload that page, we do see that loaded recipes log here
but if I then go to another page and I go back and I clear the console so that we can really see all
new logs, we see nothing there because ngOnInit is not executed again because this starting
page is on the stack of pages and it is still on that stack when we go to the detail page, the detail
page is now just on top of that stack which is why we see that.
So that means that this starting page, the recipes page was never deleted. To verify this,
let's include the onDestroy interface, so let's implement it,
make sure you also import onDestroy from @angular/core
and that forces us to add ngOnDestroy here and
there, I'll console log ngOnDestroy.
Now if we save that and we let this reload, we still see our loaded recipes log from ngOnInit
and if I go to another page, well we don't see ngOnDestroy being logged because that page is not
destroyed,
let's now add ionViewDidEnter and so on. You just add them as normal methods like this, ionViewDidEnter
and you don't need to implement any interface and there let me console log ionViewDidEnter
and we of course don't just have DidEnter, we also have WillEnter and I mentioned that WillEnter will
run before DidEnter,
so let's add it there logically, doesn't matter for the functionality but makes sense to kind of order it
in the order it will execute,
like that and let's also add the other two lifecycle hooks, ionViewWillLeave and there I of course
want to log ionViewWillLeave and then also ionViewDidLeave where I unsurprisingly will log
ionViewDidLeave.
So now we have all these important lifecycle hooks in place and now let's wait for this page to reload
and we see loaded recipes from ngOnInit but then we also see ionViewWillEnter and ionViewDidEnter.
If we now go to Schnitzel, we see ionViewWillLeave which actually is logged when our leaving
animation starts and ionViewDidLeave which is executed when we really left,
so when that animation finished. We don't see ngOnDestroy because again, the page isn't destroyed,
it's still on the stack of pages. If I now clear my console to only see new logs, if we go back, we see
WillEnter when our animation starts and DidEnter again. This now of course means that we now have places
to load our data in a way that it's always loaded when this page becomes visible and for that, we could
use ionViewWillEnter or DidEnter. For example here in ionViewWillEnter, I set my recipes now
just as I did it before in ngOnInit and there I'll change the log to just ngOnInit because we're not
really logging any recipes anymore. If I now save that and we let this app reload, we see ngOnInit,
then we see undefined which is actually output from this console log which makes sense because these
recipes are undefined at this point of time,
we haven't loaded them yet. We load them here in ionViewWillEnter though and therefore we see them
here
and now if I go to spaghetti and I delete them and I therefore am navigated back,
they are removed here too because ionViewWillEnter runs again, this in turn now loads our updated
recipes and therefore we're all good.
Now if you're wondering when ngOnDestroy runs, well you can see that in the recipe detail page,
there if I implement onDestroy and I now just copy my lifecycle hooks from the recipes page, all these
lifecycle hooks are now copied over in the recipe detail page, let me add them here and of course I don't
want to load any recipes in ionViewWillEnter so I'll remove that,
other than that I'm just logging the lifecycle hook names.
So now with that, let's also log ngOnInit so that we can see when that runs, ngOnInit
like this.
And now if we save this, let's reload, let's clear the console and let's go to Schnitzel, we see
ngOnInit,
ionViewWillLeave, WillEnter, DidEnter, DidLeave and that of course, WillLeave is coming from
the recipes page, DidLeave is also coming from that and you can see that WillLeave and WillEnter
a line,
so when WillLeave starts in the old page, WillEnter in a new page and when entering is done
in a new page, leaving is done in the old page which makes sense because these hooks basically wait
for the animation to finish.
Now if I delete that Schnitzel here, you see ngOnDestroy gets called here too because when the topmost
page is popped off the stack of pages, it's really gone from that stack of pages,
it's not hidden by some other page, the page we're going back to is not getting pushed on top,
instead the pop page is really removed and what's removed from the stack is removed from the cache you
could say and therefore ngOnDestroy runs, of course by the way not just when I delete a recipe
but also when I simply navigate back. So this is this stack of pages and how Ionic caches pages
for you,
why is this important?
Because you have to be aware of the fact that ngOnInit and ngOnDestroy will not run on every page
every time you leave it,
it depends on whether you are popping the page or you're pushing a new page on top of it and therefore
you should rely on these ionView hooks here
if you need to do some state or data updating whenever a page becomes visible or invisible so to say.